#summary N64 Data CRC
= Introduction =
Complete description of the N64 CRC along with some implementations.


= Details =

To discover the N64 Data CRC a message was sent to a controller with the last bit set. From this it was easy to compare the returned CRC and message to find the CRC polynomial:
 * Length: n=8 with an implicit 9th "1" bit
 * Poly: 0x85
 * Initial Value: 0x00
 * Post XOR: with controller pack - 0x00, without - 0xFF

As with all CRCs the message is augmented with a byte of 0x00.

That's all that's needed to describe the N64 CRC. It's a fairly simple 8 bit CRC that wasn't too difficult to work out however calculation of the CRC using the poly is quite computationally expensive, especially when running on a microcontroller. It requires a XOR, shift and most crucially knowledge of the next 7 bits which means its difficult to calculate while the message is being received/sent. Normally this wouldn't be a problem but the N64 controller requires a prompt answer (within a few µs).

To deal with this an alternative approach is used. Its possible to pre-calculate the effect a byte will have on itself and the next byte and store it in a table with 256 entries. While it can be difficult for a first year uni student like me to figure out the rewards are significant. Each byte requires merely a table lookup and a XOR.

The algorithm in pseudocode is:
{{{
while(augmented message not exhausted){
	Control = messagebyte
	messagebyte = next_messagebyte()
	messagebyte = messagebyte XOR table[Control]
}
CRC = messagebyte
}}}

Rather than attaching a 256 byte table it is included in the repository along with the C program that produced it.
     